---
title: "On dogma"
categories: philosophy
---

Two weeks ago I published [some thoughts][post] about Apple's latest programming
language explaining why it let me down through a seemingly contrived analogy.
In that post I derived some arguments from a dogmatic principle I hold,
namely:

> All corporations, big or small, have a moral imperative to advance the state
> of the art of their industry. The bigger the corporation, the more absolute
> resources it is expected to dedicate to that end. This makes leading
> corporations in a given industry very likely to direct the most significant
> paradigm shifts in it.

A few people asked me on Twitter *why* I hold that principle. I replied and
told them that it is a dogma, so there is no *why*. A dogma is the belief in
an axiom, a self-evident proposition. It cannot be derived from other logical
propositions. Other propositions may stem from it though.

One of them promptly dismissed the claim as untruthy, to be ignored, as soon
as he read the word *dogma*. Let me explain why I think dogma is not a bad
thing by definition, and why it should not be a reason to sistematically
dismiss an argument.

## Dogma and belief systems

Back in college I used have very interesting discussions with my friend
Cuauhtémoc. We were both majoring in Political Science at that time. Even
though we held quite different cosmovisions, we were able to inspect the
differences in our respective political points of view very calmly, using what
we knew about philosophy and history of political thought.

By deconstructing our arguments to understand *why* we had a specific opinion
on a subject, we almost invariably reached the roots of our respective belief
systems -- their axioms. In our case, the conflicting axiom from which all the
completely different world views stemmed was almost always the following: I
believed that the individual should prevail over the group, and he believed
exactly the opposite.

And we knew that we had reached our dogmatic axioms because we could no longer
answer the question: **why?**

In conclusion, any belief system needs a set of axioms, or dogmatic
propositions. Those are the very root of it. And they can't be judged truthy
or falsy, they can just be believed or not.

Dogma is not a matter of truth -- it is a matter of faith. In my opinion, that
doesn't make it dismissable as myth, but rather useful to understand the
logical roots of our reasoning.

[post]: http://blog.txus.io/2014/06/how-apple-failed-miserably-to-get-us-closer-to-the-moon-what-is-wrong-with-swift/
